# About the Page, Author and Contents

Here I am going to provide readers with additional information about subsidiary issues such as the connection between topics, a note on the license, and perhaps some personal information.

## What Bind All These

As it is stated in the home page this site cover a lot of matters, from _free software idea / open source_ approach to **internationalization / localization**, as well as, **_accessibility_** and **_people with special needs' right_** to _compilers_ and `DOM` / `DTD`. Because I am not limiting myself to one certain thing. Although, it is well known that such an attitude might ended up in spreading _nonsense_, which is realistic. But I do care about that possible fate.

Perhaps, such a vast continuum seems impossible for one person but there are a couple of invisible links between them, some are logical, real links, others are personal, unnecessary. Therefore, to sum up:

 1. On the top of the list: information technology is interdisciplinary and should be. That is not rational for developers to think they can solve "human intelligence" enigma by reading Wikipedia article (below there is a suc-section for it). I can name one hundred scholars who dedicated their whole career to intelligence and they still are in the early stage, we all are in the toddler period about those issues;
 2. The world of IT are chained altogether; any knowledge of a part will trigger knowledge about other parts, either immediately or not. To be a front end developer, for instance, needs to know something about back end;
 3. There are two different kind of people here: first, specialists, and second, generalists. Generalists do not build software, but rather they do something else, reviewing, assessment, comparing, etc. Their work is essential for IT progress and advancement. Assessment of PHP, Python, Nodejs, or Java for the back end needs one that is familiar with syntax, semantics, pros and cons, weaknesses and strengths of all those mentioned languages. One with PHP would not be able to do that, since eventually she/he end up in PHP superiority, even though it is not in real world. I see myself as a generalist rather than specialists;
 4. I lived a complicated, interdisciplinary  life, between many different branches of knowledge, from mathematics in highschool and a short period jn college as official study, then migrated to humanities, mostly philosophy, as official study, while in both held the counter-part. These facts led me to here which you see;
 5. Unlike the mainstream approach of online contents, whose judgments rely on assessment of the front end part, any kind of review must build upon the real foundation. Accordingly, criticizing a language, e.g C or PHP, could not depend only on the syntax or the language standard library, but a more significant points buried in their compilers/interpreters. It is possible to use whole C syntax, without any change, for another language. For example, suppose we fork C for an interpreter, rather than a compiler; Doing so, makes a new scripting language with the same syntax as C, but still it is another language. Such a concern push everyone with common sense to learn a variety of subjects. This is not development per se, but could be called meta-development. It is indispensable, as far as there is bugs and problems in IT;
 6. My philosophical background, with interests about languages, either natural or artificial, provide me concepts and conceptual tools to participate in these matters from a different point of view;
 7. Finally, why should not just give a few examples here, people from other branches that turned IT world upside down: Turing, Church, Chomsky, and also McFarlane.

These points give a clue about the question in the hand.

## The Way Wikipedia Fails You

Let us take a detour to reach the issue: The other day, I saw a web page of a faculty member, major in computer sciences, who advised his students for AI (artificial intelligence) to read Wikipedia page. I am not going to condemn Wikipedia, not at all, but the Wikipedia is not for that purpose. It is helpful for a shallow knowledge about topics, sometimes carries misinformation. A couple of weeks ago during a chat with a friend he mentioned something which was wrong abd it asked about the source. It was wiki pages, full of wrong statements. Additionally, for certain controversial topics, to which public opinion and scientific approach contradict, its editor hold the wrong side tight and when you want to edit it an edit war waiting for you; at the end of the day you will loose the game, since they have their own back.
On the other hand, any encyclopedia, with or without a scientific board, has to follow encyclopedic approach that mandates covering all parts if a topic in skin-deep details; otherwise, any topic bring about a thick book. Encyclopedia approach is useful and excellent for its purpose, but if you want to transplant a kidney based of Wikipedia pages I am afraid that will kill the patient. I can continue this for another 5000 words, to name one an origin for recent failures in the problem of AI is that they just focus on intelligence, which is problem-solving activity, but what about "understanding"? A couple of questions located in Understanding realm, not pure intelligence. Does Wikipedia could help you with the nuance difference here?! I doubt it.